Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm, I have a return guest with me,
Doctor David Pinsoff. And we, in our first interview,
we talked about the alliance theory of political belief
systems, the meaning of life and morality. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description down below.
And today, we're talking about a couple of these
substack uh posts, incentives are everything and opinions are
BS and so we're going to talk about incentives
and opinions from an evolutionary perspective. So, David, welcome
to the show. It's a huge pleasure to have
you
back. Thanks, Ricardo. I'm glad to be back, uh,
as always, a huge fan of the podcast and
really appreciate what you're doing.
Thank you. So let's start with the, with incentives
are everything then and there you start by claiming
that behavior is determined by incentives. So what do
you mean by that and what are incentives basically?
Yeah, so the conventional way in which we understand
incentives is in terms of money. So economists talk
about incentives, uh, you know, uh, working for a
particular raise or getting a bonus or companies can
offer incentives like discounts. Um, THAT'S one of the
most common ways of thinking about incentives. Occasionally it's
been broadened a bit. You sometimes hear people talk
about social incentives, um, you sometimes hear an analogy
to economics, uh, in the phrase prestige economy. Um,
AND I advocate an extreme broadening of the concept
beyond what has been conventionally used. So I wanna
talk about incentives in a way that's broader than
money, broader than particular kinds of social rewards, praise
and punishment. I want to refer to incentives as
literally anything that we want. Um, AND since I'm
an evolutionary psychologist, I think our basic motivations have
been powerfully shaped by natural selection. So if you're
going to be an incentive determinist like me, um,
then I think you need to be an evolutionary
psychologist like me, because I think evolution is really
the only way to understand our basic motivations. I
don't see an alternative theoretical perspective for understanding them.
Um, SO, yeah, basically it's, it's a common sense
view that what we do is determined by what
we want to do, and it's just saying that,
uh, everything we do is determined by what we
want to do, and what we want to do
is ultimately determined by natural selection.
And so here when it comes to the bit
about what we want to do and it being
determined, uh, are you claiming then that there's no
space for free will here? Or is there?
It depends, it depends on on your definition of
free will. So if you think of free will
as being able to do things uh that we're
not motivated to do, or that we have no
incentive to do, then yes, there's no free will.
Um, BUT if you, but I think there are
ways of thinking of of free will that are
consistent with incentive determinism. You could just think of
free will as the ability to respond to your
incentives, um, and that makes a lot of sense
of a lot of our punitive, uh, institutions and
intuitions. Um, IF I am incapable of responding to
my incentives, then it really makes no sense to
punish me, because the whole point of punishing me
is to incentivize me to behave differently. On the
other hand, if I am responsive to my incentives,
uh, and when I made my decision, I was
aware of the potential, uh, costs of doing so
and the potential punishments, then it makes a lot
of sense to punish me because you are, uh,
uh, incentivizing me to act differently in the future,
and you're incentivizing other people who are like me,
uh, to act differently. In the future. So, I
think uh our notion of free will corresponds pretty
well to an ability to respond to incentives, um,
and I think a lot of our intuitions and
practices surrounding free will can be successfully reframed in
those terms. There are some other intuitions that might
not translate. Very well, like the this idea that
we're, you know, we exist outside of our incentives,
and we can defy our incentives and pull ourselves
up by our own bootstraps or or whatever. I
think that notion of free will is uh dumb
for lack of a better word, and hard to
reconcile with the view that I'm putting forward.
But then just for people to understand a little
bit better what we're talking about here, would you
like to illustrate with a few examples? Give us
perhaps 2 or 3 examples of incentives.
Sure, I mean, there are so many, um, if,
if there, if, if the concept is as broad
as I want to make it, then there are,
you know, the list is endless, but, you know,
food, sex, uh, status, uh, comfort, health, safety, um.
Yeah, you name it.
So, and uh you mentioned evolutionary psychology at a
certain point there. So where would you say our
incentives stem from? Where do they come from?
Uh, SO yeah, as I said before, I think
they come from natural selection. I don't see an
alternative theory for, for where they come from, which
means that, uh, our basic motivations, uh, and I'm
not talking about our instrumental motivations, uh, it's actually,
it might be helpful to to back up and
and talk about the distinction. So, uh, the things
that we, uh, basically want are things we want
sort of in and of themselves intrinsically, uh, for
their own sake, and, uh, you could think about
another set of desires as instrumental desires. Um, uh,
WE want, uh, say money because it can buy
us. Food. So the desire for food would be
basic, it would be from evolution, and the desire
for money would be instrumental. We only want money
because it can buy us things like food. If
the if the money can no longer buy us
things like food, then we stop wanting money, whereas
um we're never gonna stop wanting food. Uh, BECAUSE
that's just built into us. Unless, of course, it
conflicts with some other desire, like, for status, maybe
I, I would fast to display my devotion to
a particular religious community, uh, in, in, in that
sense, you know, incentives can conflict with one another,
but you're never going to make one incentive go
away. You're never going to make your hunger, for
example, go away.
Yeah. So where you come from in terms of
your psychological framework, even if cross culturally, apparently, we
can find a huge array of different kinds of
incentives, would you say that those are simply different
cultural manifestations of the same set of underlying evolved
um motivations?
Yes, I would say so. I think a large
part of cultural variation comes from what I would
call status games, um, and I argue in a
post called Status is Weird, that status games are
very dynamic, uh, and constantly shifting, um, because of
the paradoxical nature of status, that is, overtly seeking
status often lowers your status, and for that reason,
becoming aware that we're playing a status game can
often make that status game collapse, or at least
significantly invert or rearrange the social hierarchy, where those
at the Top are the iciest, uh, most vainglorious,
narcissistic, selfish status seekers, and those at the bottom
are more uh humble and authentic. So, uh, uh,
recognizing a status game can often invert, uh, the
payoff structure of the game. Um, SO because of
that dynamism, that status games are constantly collapsing and
re-emerging in antithetical forms, you get lots of cultural
variation in what gets you status and what lowers
your status. Um, SO a big part of cultural
variation in our incentive structures are just different ways
that we can get status, different strategies we pursue
for getting status. What gets you status in one
place is gonna be different from what gets you
status in a different place, but the basic incentive
of status is the same.
Right. Uh, AND are there occasions where conflicts or
conflict, not conflict, sorry, where incentives might conflict with
one another and if so, how do we deal
with conflicting incentives?
Yeah, absolutely. So if incentives are just things we
want, then obviously, you know, things that we want
can conflict with each other. We experience this almost
every day. Um, EXERCISING, for example, uh we might
uh want the long term health benefits of exercise,
but the short term discomfor. Uh, MIGHT be unpleasant,
but if we care more about the long term
health benefits, then, uh, that's going to outweigh the
short term, uh, discomfort of doing it. Um, LIKEWISE,
we could be internally conflicted about doing unethical things
like lying or or cheating on our spouses, um,
and in that case, there will be a tug
of war between the uh the incentive to behave
honestly or ethically and the self-interested in incentive to
cheat. Uh, OR, or steal or lie, or whatever.
Um, AND I think we resolve those sorts of
conflicts in a pretty straightforward way. I think we,
we think about the different outcomes that will result
if we take either choice, uh, we play out
the scenarios in our head. So ultimately, uh, the
way we resolve these kinds of trade-offs, I think,
is that the stronger incentive wins. It's pretty straightforward.
The one, the the the the more powerful motivation
is going to be the one that moves you
more effectively.
Uh, OK, but what makes an incentive more powerful
than another? I mean, does it have to do
with the kinds of incentives we might be considering?
Does it have anything to do with the context?
I don't know if you want to illustrate that
with, with an example.
Sure, I mean, a, a big part of it
is probably just random genetic variation. So we all
have these basic set of evolved motives for food,
sex, status, whatever, um, and just by random roll
of the genetic dice, you know, our, uh, weightings
of these different motivations will be a bit stronger
in some of us than in others. Some of
us will be more curious or horny or hungry
than others. Some of us will be more narcissistic
and inglorious than others, just randomly. Um, SO for
that reason, which incentives loom loom larger for any
particular individual is going to depend on their, uh,
particular, uh, genetic constellation of traits. Um, AND then
there's also, you know, environmental and and cultural differences
about the strength of different incentives. Um, THERE could
be stronger status rewards and punishments in one culture
than in another, uh, in one culture, uh, speaking
out against the dominant narrative could get you burned
at the stake, and another it could merely get
you canceled, and another it could, uh, merely get
you frowned at. Um, THOSE kinds of cultural differences
are going to determine the strength of the incentive.
In that case, there could be ecological differences in
some cultures, um, pathogens might be more prevalent and
dangerous, so the incentives of behaving in a hygienic
way are going to be stronger in those cultures.
Um, POORER cultures are going to have different incentive
structures, uh, surrounding, uh, institutions of uh reciprocity and
risk pooling that reduce the risk of, uh, starvation
or deprivation, um. Yeah, stuff like that. That makes
sense.
Mhm. Yes, yes, it makes perfect sense. And one
very interesting example of an incentive that I guess
we have in all human societies, of course, it
has different, it manifests in different ways, but I
imagine it should be present in all human societies
is that we feel the Need or we feel
they want to look virtuous to other people. So,
uh, could you explain that? First of all, what
does virtuosity mean, particularly from an evolutionary perspective and
then why do we want to look virtuous, virtuous
to other people?
Sure, um, I think of virtue, uh, as roughly
desirability as a social partner. I think our concept
of virtue probably refers more to the cooperative aspects
of social relationships. So if I'm going to be
fair with you in dividing resources, I'm going to
be honest with you and not lie to you,
or cheat you or manipulate you. I'm going to
be kind to you and and generous to you,
uh, and share resources with you. Those are those
are generally the types of things that we talk
about when we talk about virtue. So I think
of virtue as as your your value as a
cooperative partner. Um, AND because we live in a
social marketplace where we get to choose between potential
cooperative partners and invest in some cooperative relationships over
other cooperative relationships, it behooves us to signal our
value as a cooperative partner, so that people will
want to with us and not partner with our
rivals. Um, SO we are constantly competing to display
our virtue, um, not just in an absolute sense,
but in a relative sense, that is, we want
to look more virtuous than our competitors in the
social marketplace, so there is a competition for moral
superiority, uh, and we find tons of clever and
creative ways to signal our virtue to one another,
and in turn to see through those signals as
bullshit occasionally.
Would this constitute an example of a stereo game
then?
Yeah, I think virtue, virtue games are a kind
of status game. Um, uh, Will Storr has a
wonderful book where he talks about status games that
he carves it up into three different categories, uh,
success games, uh, virtue games, and dominance games. Uh,
I think that's a pretty good way of, of
carving it up. I might add a few more
like surrounding, um, say epistemic status games, I think
is another one, but yeah, I think that's a
pretty good way to carve it up.
Epistemic status games, what does that mean exactly? Would
that be something that you find among, for example,
intellectuals and academics?
Yeah, I think so. So, um, we trust certain
sources of information more than others. We deem them
more credible, more reliable, more trustworthy. Um, AND there
are huge, uh, benefits to being seen as a
credible and reliable source of information. There are benefits
to be seen to being seen as reasonable and
rational, um, and so a lot of the status
games that intellectuals play with one another are competitions
to be more reasonable, um, more thoughtful, um, more
epistemically credible and reliable, more meticulous. Um, THOSE, those
types of competitions. So there's, there's actually surprising scarcity
of, uh, academic literature on epistemic status games. I,
I feel like there should be tons more on
this topic, um, but I think it's because it's
the water that intellectuals swim in that they have
a hard time seeing it.
So, uh, one thing that you mentioned in your,
in your, not, not your paper, your post is
that when trying to look virtues at the same
time, we have to seem humble. So, how do
we go about doing that? What kinds of strategies
do we employ?
Yeah, I mean, it's, it's pretty hard to do,
uh, as you can imagine, to look virtuous without
looking like you were trying to look virtuous. Uh
IT'S a pretty difficult hoop to jump through, um,
but we find all sorts of clever and creative
ways of jumping through it. Um, THERE'S a hilarious
episode of Curb Enthusiasm where Ted Danson uh donates
anonymously, I think it was to an art museum,
uh, and then he proceeds to tell everyone that
he was the person who donated anonymously. Uh, THEREBY
obviating his anonymous donation, and yet he still got
tons of status, and he got extra status for
donating anonymously. And by that, by that logic, he,
uh, upstaged his rival, Larry David, who donated conspicuously
by putting his name on the wing. And so
Ted Danson ended up gaining more status than Larry,
because he donated anonymously and then told everyone that
he donated anonymously. Um, SO that's one type of
maneuver we might make is we might, uh, do
good deeds anonymously, or at least discreetly or inconspicuously,
and hope that some people pick up on that,
and the people who do pick up on that
will give us extra status for having done it
inconspicuously, or anonymously or discreetly.
And do incentives tie in any way to morality?
What does it mean to be good or bad?
Yeah, no, I think uh morality is just another
kind of incentive structure. I think morality can be
pretty cleanly reduced to the virtue game, the competition
to look virtuous and fair and trustworthy. Um, IT
might not exhaust all of morality, but I think
it's a pretty good chunk of it is just
competing to look like a virtuous person, uh, and
obviously we, we compete in, in, in ways that
try to show that we don't care about competing
for virtue, uh, as, as I just discussed. Um,
BUT yeah, I think, I think of morality as,
as largely a kind of virtue game.
And do we have any conscious access to all
of this information? I mean, do we understand or
do we have conscious access to the fact that
we are behaving this way with this kind of
motives behind our behavior or not?
Absolutely not. Yeah, no, um, in fact, not only
are we uh unaware of it, I think it
is often, uh, detrimental to us to become aware
of it. Um, SO, as I mentioned earlier, becoming
aware of the fact that we're playing a status
game can sometimes make that status game collapse and
invert, uh, the existing hierarchy. Um, SO being aware
of our status seeking, um, Can often uh hinder
our desire for status. Uh, IT can lower our
status insofar as we are seen as a status
seeker. And so, in order to deceive other people
that we don't really care about status, we often
deceive ourselves in order to more effectively deceive others,
or in our attempt to deceive others, we often
inadvertently deceive ourselves as well. So I think um
a lot of these things go on in the
dark, covertly. Um, SO, uh, we convince ourselves through
sacred narratives that what we're really pursuing is some
sacred value. Um, LIKE knowledge or beauty or authenticity,
or equality or self-actualization, or something that sounds lovely,
um, and we convince ourselves that that's the thing
we're pursuing, not status. And, and, and then we
compete to show each other that we care more
about the sacred value than than any other selfish
pursuit, and the competition is itself a kind of
status competition, but nobody knows that it's a status
competition. Um, AND if they did know, then it
would, it would collapse, uh, and, um. It would
be most damaging to those who are winning in
the status game, or who have achieved high status
already, and it might be most beneficial to those
who are uh lower status uh in the game
and feel like they're not getting the status they're
entitled to, and that can give rise to strategic
cynicism whereby people try to make a status game
collapse in order to increase their relative standing, uh,
and put others down. Uh, THIS all gets very
complicated as you might imagine, um, but that's just
a taste of of the way I'm thinking about
it.
But even if we don't have conscious access to
all of these underlying motives and what goes around
in our psychology to produce the kinds of behaviors
that we exhibit, I guess that we still need
explanations for our behavior. I guess that even primarily
because we also need to sometimes explain our own
behavior and our motives to other people. As other
people need explanations, but also I guess that even
psychologically speaking, for our, for our own, for our
own psychological well-being, we also need to sort of
integrate things within a personal narrative of some kind.
I, I mean, do you agree with that? And
if so, uh, I mean, those kinds of narratives
that we might create, what functions do they serve?
Yeah, so one function, as I mentioned, is, is
just keeping our status games stable, keeping them from
collapsing or inverting, um, and that is often more
in the interests of higher status people than lower
status or embittered people, um, which is why you
might expect lower status or embittered people to favor
more cynical and nihilistic ideas that challenge the prevailing
sacred narratives. Um, SORRY, uh, uh, uh, could you
repeat the question because I feel like I got
sidetracked.
Yeah, no, no problem. So I was asking you
basically if the kinds of narratives that we feel
the need to elaborate to tell other people about
our own behavior and the motives behind. And it
tend also to tell ourselves to, to, I don't
know, psychological wellbeing for for psychological well-being or something
like that. What kinds of functions do those narratives
serve?
Got it. What are the functions? Yeah, so yeah,
one of them is stabilizing our status games, um.
Another is just um gaining status itself. So um
if I do something unethical or unflattering, uh it
is in my interest to try to paint what
I did in the most flattering possible terms. Um,
AND in my efforts to convince other people that
what I did wasn't so bad, I might convince
myself as a tactic for more effectively convincing others
in the same way that an attorney might practice
their opening statement in front of a mirror, uh,
before they enter the courtroom. We often practice our
own opening statements in our in in our minds,
in the privacy. Of our own heads, that's what
a lot of our fantasies and ruminations and obsessions
are about, just playing out what we're gonna say
in our heads. Um, AND uh we in doing
that often convince ourselves of all sorts of things,
then helps us to more effectively convince others if
and when we were ever put on the stand
or put on trial, so to speak. So that's
another function of them. Um, THERE are probably other
functions, I think coordination may be one of them.
Um, ALL of us, uh, getting on the same
page, um, status games themselves depend on coordination. We
all need to agree on what is high status
or what is low status, um, and you could
imagine that being pretty damaging if I'm, uh, discoordinated
with other people about that. If I end up
praising and admiring a social pariah, or if I
end up dissing and insulting a widely regarded, uh,
person. Um, THAT is going to be very bad
for me. So we all need to coordinate on
what the rules of our status game, uh, are.
Um, SO status games are largely a coordination problem,
and I think lots of um myths and narratives
are also, uh, uh, coordination strategies. Um, OFTEN, uh,
it is more important for us to coordinate with
one another and get on the same page with
one another, uh, than it is to coordinate with
reality itself.
But even if we don't have a conscious access
to our own underlying incentives, when we think about,
for example, people we like versus people we don't
like or uh another example would be political parties
that we like. Like versus political parties that are
opposed to them, for example, we tend to frame
things in terms of incentives, right? So, and how
do we go about doing that when it comes
to what we like versus what we don't like.
Yeah, so when, when we talk about likable people
or unlikable people or heroes and villains, I think
uh a lot of this incentive talk goes out
the window, uh, cause if you think about it,
there's a pretty basic conflict between incentive-based thinking and
uh Manichean good versus evil thinking, uh, which is
that, uh, it Increases your sympathy for the bad
guys and lowers your praise and esteem for the
good guys. If the bad guys are just bad
because they were incentivized to be bad, well, then
it doesn't, you know, make much sense to uh
hate them and demonize them, or at least as
much. Um, AND if the good guys are just
good because they're incentivized to be good because it's
in their self-interest to be good, well then, you
know, you kind of lose some of your uh
admiration for them. Um, AND because, uh, coalitions, uh,
compete with each other by coordinating more effectively and
thinking of themselves as, uh, superior to rival groups
in order to bolster commitment to the group and
prevent defection to other groups, it is often in
coalition's interests to uh spread these kinds of self
glorifying other demonizing narratives, um. To help them compete
with other groups, and I think in creating those
narratives, uh, incentives, uh, go out the window and
in in some cases they're even t taboo to
acknowledge.
And you mentioned the term likable at a certain
point there, so what makes a person likable?
I could go on all day here. I mean,
we are one of the judgiest, probably the judgedgiest
species on the planet. Uh, THE number of traits
and dimensions on which we judge each other is,
uh, enormous and bewildering, um, but yeah, I mean,
I could, I could go on all day, honesty,
kindness, fairness, generosity. Uh, BRAVERY, loyalty, uh, cleverness, sense
of humor, uh, self-awareness, uh, I, I could go
on all day.
But I mean, what makes a person likable at
the end of the day, isn't it basically doing
the right things or saying and doing the right
things, isn't that it, basically.
Yeah, so, uh, if you think in terms of
the social marketplace perspective where we're uh picking and
choosing different social partnerships to invest in, and we're
evaluating people based on their value as a social
partner. Then, uh, yeah, one of the main sources
of information we attend to when evaluating social partners
is language, is what people are saying. Um, THAT'S
a pretty good heuristic a lot of the times
for picking up on a lot of these cues.
What are people talking about, uh, who are they
displaying loyalty to, who are they displaying hostility to,
um, what kinds of traits can be inferred based
on the words that they use, uh, and so
one of the, the biggest Um, sources of our
social decision making, uh, and our social evaluations just
come from what people say, whether they're saying the
right things or the wrong things. And, and, you
know, if they're saying the right things, we like
them, if they're saying the wrong things, we don't
like them. And that incentivizes us to say the
right things to get people to like us, and
to avoid saying the wrong things, uh, to avoid
eliciting others dislike.
And how do we determine what are the right
things to say and do?
Um, WELL, um, whatever, uh, wins us likability points,
whatever gets people to like us. Um, SO, uh,
we can, we often, um, use our own judgments
of others to simulate how others will judge us.
So, uh, you know, things that we will judge
positively, uh, in other people. Um, WE will engage
in those same behaviors ourselves. So if I, uh,
like people who, um, say progressive things or who
say things that are, um, supportive of progressive ideology,
um, chances are other people are going to like
me for saying those same progressive things, so I'm
going to be motivated to say those things, uh,
to, uh, get other people to like me more
and to uh win the various status games that
I'm playing with my peers.
But that happens if you are included in the
circle of mostly uh mostly progressive people, right? Because
if it's mostly conservative, I would imagine that you're
saying progressive things wouldn't garner you much uh status
or likability.
Right. Yes, absolutely. So it's gonna depend on your
particular social environment and what particular types of words
and deeds are rewarded in your social environment. Yeah.
So, moving on to the other post, I would
like to ask you about today where you talk
about opinions and the title is opinions are bullshit.
So, what is an opinion anyway? Because I, I
was thinking until I read your article or, or
your post that it would, it was just a
preference. When we talk about opinions, we were talking,
we would be talking about preferences, but you argue
in a different way. So could you tell us
about that?
Yeah, so I think they're not just preferences. I
think, you know, they're partly preferences. I think that's
that's part of what's going on with our opinions,
but it's not the whole story. um, AND that's
just because we already know how to talk about
our preferences. We have a whole language for talking
about our preferences. We say, you know, I like
this, I don't like this. I don't care for
this. Um, SO if if opinions were just preferences,
Then we would not need uh the language of
opinions, right? We would just talk about what we
like and what we don't like, and that would
be it. Um, AND if you bring the language
of opinions into our preferences, it sounds weird. So
if I say something like, it is my strongly
held opinion that I like cilantro, that sounds really
weird, doesn't it? Wouldn't you just say, I like
cilantro? Like, why, why do you need to say
it's your opinion? Like, what additional information does that
bring into it? Right? So opinions have to be
something more than just preferences. And so, uh, what
I think opinions are, are preferences, uh, combined with
a set of positive judgments about the type of
people who hold those preferences, and a set of
negative judgments about the people who don't hold those
preferences. So, me saying I like cilantro is not
an opinion. But me saying I like cilantro, and
the people who like cilantro, uh have a more
sophisticated palate and are more discerning and are, you
know, smarter and more authentic and have better taste
in food, and the people who Don't like cilantro,
or Philistines, uh, they're barbarous, uh, and, uh, they,
their taste in food should not be respected. Uh,
THEN all of a sudden those additional judgments I'm
making, those bring my preference for cilantro into the
realm of opinion. So opinions are preferences combined with
a set of social judgments about the people who
hold those preferences or lack those preferences.
But because different people have different opinions, I mean,
does it have anything to do with some of
our psychological predispositions, like, for example, different personality traits
and things like that.
Yeah, absolutely, um, you know, our, our preferences are
are certainly shaped by um our personality traits by,
you know, random genetic, genetically heritable dispositions. Um, THEY'RE
also shaped by a variety of cultural and environmental
sources, um, often what we prefer will be socially
incentivized, uh, in our social environment. Um, IF I
get status for being a wine snob, I'm going
to be more likely to develop a taste for
wine, and in particular the fancier kinds of wine.
Um, SO yeah, uh, preferences are multiply determined, uh,
from, from various, uh, both biological and cultural and
environmental sources.
But particularly when we express an opinion that deviates
from the majority opinion, if we express certain minority
tastes, for example, do you think that has anything
to do with the actual quality of the things
they refer to or is it something else?
Um, THAT could be part of what's going on,
but I think people are going to be very
biased, uh, to think that about their opinions, because
the, the point of expressing an opinion, I think,
is to shape social norms in our favor. Um,
SO at this point it might be helpful to
backtrack, uh, and, and think about what what norms
are. Um, I think norms are just widely shared
opinions. Um, YOU could think of opinions as pieces
or fragments of norms, and when everyone shares the
same opinion, you get a full-fledged norm. Um, SO
if opinions are just the judgments we make about
other people based on their preferences, then when we
all share the same opinion, then we're all gonna
make the same judgments about each other based on
what we do. Um, SO if we all share
the opinion that McDonald's is great, Uh, that McDonald's
eaters are authentic and honest, uh, and, and blunt,
and they tell it like it is, and they
don't virtue signal. Well, that's going to create a
social norm among our group to, uh, like and
eat at McDonald's. If I like and eat at
McDonald's, I'm going to gain status points, uh, in
our group. I'm gonna be judged as uh honest
and blunt and authentic. And uh anti virtue signaling,
uh, and if I uh rant about McDonald's as
an evil corporation, uh, then I'm going to lose
status points in our group. Um, SO those, uh,
victories and losses and status are basically what we
talk about when we talk about norms. A norm
is just what we gain status for doing and
what we lose status for not doing. Um, I,
I hope I said that correctly, um, and Yeah,
so backtracking, um, so if opinions are widely, so
sorry, if norms are widely shared opinions, what we're
doing when we express our opinion is we're trying
to shape uh social norms in our favor, then
that means that when we express our opinions, we're
gonna be biased in all sorts of ways, cause
we're gonna want to shape social norms in ways
that advance our self-interest and that it and that
boost our status, and that lower our rivals status.
Um, IN order to win the opinion game and
change social norms, we're going to have to make
our opinions look more objective than they really are.
So we're gonna have to argue that our opinions
are actually rooted in some objective feature of reality.
Um, SO if I like a particular kind of
music, I'm going to argue that it's objectively good,
and uh if you can't see that, then you
must be dumb or unsophisticated or have bad taste
in music, or maybe you're too biased and conformist,
uh, maybe, you know, you're not authentic enough like
me. Um, IN order to express my opinion about
that particular type of music, I'm going to have
to, uh, diss either implicitly or explicitly the people
who don't like that music. And if I'm successful,
then I can make, uh, uh, liking that music
a new kind of social norm, and that benefits
me because I'm the person who discovered that band,
I'm the person who liked that music, and that's
going to boost my status. And all this is
going to occur independently of whether my arguments are
correct. So, I could be totally wrong about about
the music. It could be that you don't need
to be smart or sophisticated at all to to
to see that particular thing, or maybe that particular
thing isn't actually that impressive or skillful, or maybe
the music isn't actually that good, and I'm the
one who's biased by conformity or status seeking or
or whatever. These kinds of considerations are kind of
uh ignored when we express our opinions, because the
goal is not to accurate. DESCRIBE what we're talking
about or accurately describe reality, the goal is to
win the opinion game and transform our preferences into
social norms. So yeah, it could be the case
that if you like indie music or indie movies,
you might be correct about some feature of those
movies, but I think it's pretty unlikely, given our
biases to uh win the opinion game. Our motivation
is to win the opinion game, not to accurately
describe reality.
Mhm. But isn't it, at least to some extent,
aren't we also looking for, uh, uh, I mean,
particularly in certain social circles to distinguish ourselves from
other people and then, I mean, I, I, I'm
not sure if in those particular cases, the objective
or the goal would be to, to turn. Our
opinions into social norms, but to turn our opinions
into something that people recognize as being superior to
what is even normative or common, right? But that,
that happens a lot uh and this, that is
one of the ways by which we acquire status
we, we play that game well, right?
Yeah, so what you're I think what you're talking
about is ultimately the same as the norm. So
if we all think that a certain preference is
superior, say Radiohead is superior to Taylor Swift, and
that is identical to saying that liking Radiohead is
a social norm. I now have a social incentive
to say I like Radiohead and to say I
don't like Taylor Swift. If I say I like
Taylor Swift and hate Radiohead, that's going to lower
my status, uh, that's going to cost me, uh,
social points. And so those winning and winnings and
losings of social points, those are what norms are.
Uh, IF we all think something is superior, then
that creates a norm for us to say we
like that thing. Um, SO yeah, I, I view
them as, as, uh, identical.
Mhm. Uh, BUT social norms, we can have different
social norms for different social groups or social circles,
right? Because I mean, if I am a Swifty,
of course, for me and for people who are
part of my group, Taylor Swift will be the
best artist ever. But if we, if I prefer,
if I'm part of another social group, maybe it's.
Do you have and so on and so forth,
right? So, uh, also because we, we see that
in our society, for example, it is very common
for intellectuals or or people who identify as intellectual
to have particular tastes when it comes to, for
example, art that are very different from tastes of
uh common people.
Yeah, absolutely. So it's gonna be powerfully shaped by
the nature of our social networks. But any social
network is not going to be 100% homogeneous. So
yeah, if I'm a swifty, I'm gonna hang out
with other swifties probably, but it's not that everyone
I know in my social network is going to
be a swifty, uh, and it would still benefit
me to convince those other people in my social
network that I'm superior for being a swifty, right?
Cause then I get my status raised and other
Swifties get their status raised and my group gets
its status raised. Uh, AND so that's still in
my interest, so I might try to talk the
non-Swifties and my social network into being a swifty,
or at least giving some status to Swifties and,
and Taylor Swift's music. Uh, SAME, same thing might
go for the particular tastes and preferences of intellectuals.
Um, YEAH, intellectuals are gonna hang out with each
other, but they might hang out with some people
who are not, uh, in that circle or not,
uh, intellectuals per se, and they might try to,
uh, wax poetic about the, uh, the value of,
of knowledge and and the beauty of their theories
and and how they're, um. What they're doing is
making the world a better place and how ideas
uh uh matter and and determine the course of
history, and yada yada yada.
But uh how do norms, or how do opinions
become norms? How are norms established basically?
Yeah, so usually it takes a high status, or
charismatic, or a politically powerful person to get on
their soapbox, express their opinions, and then cause other
people to shift their opinions toward the high status
person. So if everybody loves me, uh, everyone is
going to be biased to copy what I do,
uh, in order to endear themselves to me. They're
gonna be biased to agree with whatever I say,
uh, in order to get closer to me. So,
uh, in that way, norms bend toward the interests
of high status people. If I'm high status, my
opinions are going to be uh more highly respected,
people are going to listen to my opinions, and
they're going to be more likely to share my
opinions, merely because I'm high status, right? Um, ANOTHER
aspect of it is, uh, political power or uh
network power. The more people I have who will
listen to me, the more likely. My opinions are
going to win out in the opinion game. If
I get to shout my opinions on a megaphone
to thousands of people, or if I have a
popular sub stack that thousands of people read, or
if I, you know, write a column in The
New York Times that, you know, most of America
needs, I'm, you know, I'm going to have a
pretty big effect on the prevailing opinions on the
prevailing norms in my culture. So, a lot of
it just comes down to um norms bending toward
the interests of the high status and the powerful.
But to be a bit more hopeful, part of
it could come from um the genuinely better opinions
rising to the top, and the competition to win
the opinion game. So if I have genuinely better
arguments that the food I like or the music
I listen to, or the the movies I prefer
are actually better in some way. Maybe they convey
uh the skill of the artist uh uh more
effectively. Um, MAYBE they, um, create, you know, better
social incentives, maybe they uplift us and, and inspire
us to be better people in some way. If
I'm right about that, um, and I have good
arguments about that, well, then my opinion might naturally
rise to the top as people see it as
just more persuasive, um. So, uh, you know, if,
if, if a particular food is unhealthy, and it
really is unhealthy, well then it's, it's probably my
opinion that the food is bad is going to
be more likely to win the opinion game, in
so far as the evidence uh of that food's
ill health effects are undeniable. Um, SO there is
some room for, for good ideas to win out,
um, but it's going to be heavily biased by
the interests of high status and powerful people, as
most things are.
That's very interesting. So would you say that this
sort of opinion game also plays out in science,
like science at the end of the day is
basically people with different, in this particular case, we're
going to call them opinions instead of hypotheses, for
example, but people would, would, with different hypotheses and
the way we arrive. THOSE hypothesis. I mean, in
this case, it could be a lot of different
things. We could just have particular psychological predispositions to
prefer one explanation to the other or perhaps we
come from a different framework and we want to
acquire, acquire status through that framework and so we
want that framework to be the correct one. I
mean, so we also see this playing out in
science. As an institution, right? It's not really, or,
or perhaps at the end of the day, if
we are honest with ourselves, it's not really about
people really wanting to figure out the truth, but
perhaps, uh, it's that kind of game playing out.
And then, and then later, it's when, yeah, eventually
we figure out the truth, right.
Yeah, no, that's a really interesting point. I hadn't
thought a lot about whether the opinion game applies
to science, but I think it may well, uh,
apply. Um, SO I do agree that science is
a status game, uh, and it's a particular kind
of status game, uh, that truth emerges from over
time, and that's what makes it. So wonderful and
beneficial to us. But at the end of the
game, it still is a status game. Scientists gain
status for making new discoveries and advancing new theories
that end up uh being judged as correct. Um,
AND so you could think of scientific hypotheses and
theories as opinions. Uh, INSOFAR as the scientist, uh,
makes negative judgments about the people who agree with
that theory, and, uh, sorry, positive judgments about the
people who agree with that theory and negative judgments
about the people who disagree with that theory, um,
then, uh, You could call that theory an opinion.
Um, AND it, it sort of makes sense that,
you know, if, if I think my theory is
objectively correct and insightful, And you don't see that,
well, why don't you see that? Maybe you're not
as smart as me. Maybe you're not as insightful
or or or sophisticated as me. Maybe you're biased
in some way, maybe you're biased to uh fit
in with uh your subculture. Maybe you're biased by
your politics, maybe you're biased because you uh studied
under a particular person and you want to uh
gain status uh with that person, independent of whether
their ideas are correct. Um, THERE could be all
sorts of negative inferences I might make about you
for rejecting my theory. So in that case, insofar
as I'm making those judgments about you, And I'm
making positive judgments about myself for being smart and
insightful enough to uh devise that theory, then you
could call that theory an opinion. And insofar as
that opinion wins out, uh, in the opinion game
and people recognize that it is correct, and it
is insightful, uh, well, people will start to gain
status for, uh, adhering to the theory, uh, for,
uh, believing in it and endorsing it, um, and
people will start to lose status for rejecting it
or questioning it or being skeptical of it, um.
And uh so you could, you could maybe argue
that that um Science is a kind of opinion
game, um, and it is a special kind of
opinion game with an incentive structure that uh uh
particularly allows for the truest ideas to win, as
opposed to the highest status ideas. Now, of course,
there are some biases along those lines, even in
science. So there are fads in science, there are
high status or prestigious uh theories or ways of
looking at things, um, and so these social and
political elements can distort the search for truth, um.
The prevailing theories will often um bend toward the
interests of the intelligentsia and the politically powerful, uh,
and the high status. And so that is a
a huge bias that we try to overcome with
science, but the hope is that that bias will
be overcome and the truest ideas will ultimately win
out.
Yeah, but that came to my mind. I mean,
and, and it's very interesting if it is true
that science works that way because, I mean, if
we, if people really are like this and we
have these kinds, these sort of motives and we
play status games or opinion games in this in
this specific case. Then if we are to be
realistic, then people work like that and they are
not really trying to be or they aren't even
objective in terms of their search their supposed search
for truth. They aren't impartial, they are very Very
much, uh, biased, they are very much partial, but
that's the way the the game works and that's
what eventually leads to proof. So at the end
of the day, if that's the way things work,
it's a good thing, right.
Yeah, I agree, um, you know, obviously I agree.
I'm, I'm, I'm a social scientist, so I, I
believe in it, in the institution, at least to
some extent. Obviously there are many problems in it,
and there are many ways in which the search
for truth, uh, can be damaged and corrupted and
subverted, uh, and you know, I could go on
all day about the ways in which it is.
But at the end of the day, there's still
some sliver of hope that the best ideas will
prevail. Um, I think, um, the mechanism that leads
to true and useful ideas is probably more powerful
in the natural and physical sciences than it is
in the social sciences, sadly, just because um there
are stronger biases at play in the social sciences,
because it's a science of us, and we have
uh lots of strong opinions about us. Um, YOU
know, uh, the great Robert Trivers once said that,
um, the greater the social content of a discipline,
the slower its progress. Uh, I think that is
a deep insight, I think that is correct, um,
and I think that is why, you know, other
sciences have gotten us to the moon, and social
sciences have gotten us to a replication crisis, um.
Which isn't to say that other fields haven't had
a, you know, replication crises as well, but I
think um I, I do agree with Trivers that
there are unique problems uh uh in in the
social sciences and in any discipline that um touches
on human affairs. I think once those sciences do
touch on socially uh contentious topics, um, the search
for truth can often be corrupted in various ways.
Well, I mean, but maybe this would be a
great idea for one of your upcoming substack posts.
Maybe you could write something like uh figuring out
the truth or wanting to figure out the truth
is bullshit because that's not, that's not what. People
really want. I mean, that that ends up happening,
but it's not the primary uh motive. Right.
Yes, exactly. Scientists like to tell themselves that it's
their primary motive, but I don't think it is.
I think it is a byproduct of the institution
when it's working well, but it's not the goal
of any individual scientist. Uh, AND that might be
a, a depressing thing to hear, but I think
it's ultimately a correct description of human psychology.
Yup. So let me just ask you one last
question because uh earlier when we were talking about
incentives that and narratives specifically at a certain point
I mentioned that we need narratives also because we
need explanations to give to other people. So in
the particular case of opinions, do you think that
when we present arguments to other people as to
why our preferences are better. Again, do you think
that, again, we are really trying to figure out
the truth or that we are trying to convince
other people that we are right to acquire status.
I think that's the latter. We're trying to convince
other people that we're right, um, but there are
some cases where the only way to convince other
people that we're right is to say true and
convincing and compelling. Things that's gonna depend on the
nature of of your social environment. Um, AND it's
gonna depend on, you know, what other people find
persuasive, whether they find good arguments persuasive and and
strong evidence persuasive, or whether they find uh um
status persuasive, independent of the the the power of
the arguments. Um, SO yeah, it's gonna depend. But
yeah, I, I, I, I don't wanna say that,
you know, um, truth is, uh, plays zero role
in our opinions.
Uh, YEAH, and I, and I'm in. Oh, no,
no, no, sorry, sorry, you were uh you were
just cut off for a few seconds there, you
were saying that you don't want to say that
truth doesn't matter at all or something along those
lines.
Yeah, just, you know, if, if the goal is
to convince someone, um, then you're going to have
to say things that the other person will find
convincing. Often you can convince people by uh saying
untrue things. Um, OFTEN you can convince them by
not caring about the truth and just appealing to
your superior status or your superior wisdom, or, uh,
by intimidating them, uh, into thinking that if they
don't agree with you, then bad things will happen
to them. Those are alternative means of persuading someone,
uh, but one of the means by which we
persuade someone is by just making good arguments and
and and trying to appeal to what is out
there that they can see. So yeah, I don't
wanna say that, you know, 0%. Uh, OF our
opinions or arguments are, are related or connected to
the truth. Um, BUT I do want to say
that the percentage is lower than we might like
to think.
So when it comes to science, specifically, I guess
that at the end of the day, what we
really need there are good incentives, right? Because if
people are have proper incentives and if we have
proper norms set in place that, uh, I mean,
that tend to lead us to truth, then uh
science works better, right?
Yeah, absolutely. So you could think about the incentives
that led to the replication crisis as being a
bad set of incentives. Um, SO you get lots
of prestige in science currently, and, uh, ideally, hopefully
less so, but certainly before the replication crisis, you
got lots of status for making a big flashy,
counterintuitive discovery, and you got no status at all
for trying to replicate other people's work. Um, AND
so that created an incentive for, uh, pumping out
lots of low quality studies that gave flashy and
counterintuitive results, uh, and no work at all trying
to replicate those results. Um, SO that would be
an example of a perverse incentive structure, uh, where
in that case you gain status for, um, obscuring
the truth, rather than finding it. And currently, you
know, there are efforts to try to correct those
incentives. So there are uh uh multiple projects being
undertaken to try to replicate others' work, um, their
institutions uh for uh trying to reward replication work
with with greater status. Journals are starting to uh
publish replication work um more frequently than they used
to. Um, THERE are incentives, uh, for not pea
hacking, so for pre-registering your hypotheses so that you
can't, you know, twiddle with the statistics until you
get the result you want, you have to say
what statistics you're gonna run in advance and then
run those exact statistics. Um, SO that's another, uh,
positive development. Um, Sample sizes have gotten larger, uh,
which is good, um. We've, I think we're correctly
focusing more on effect sizes rather than P values.
This is more in the weeds here, but I
think lots of positive developments have taken place in
the wake of the replication crisis to try to
correct these incentives so that the truth will emerge
more effectively. There's still plenty of work to be
done, there's still plenty of problems, but I think
it's headed in the right direction.
And so, and, and this will be my last
question. Do you think that then if people, scientists,
philosophers of science were aware of these more evolutionary
take on incentives and opinions that perhaps they would
or they would develop better and new ways of
doing science?
Well, it is my opinion that uh that is
correct, and it is, of course, my self-serving opinion,
as most opinions are, that that is correct because
I'm an evolutionary psychologist, and so, uh, touting the
virtues of evolutionary psychology is in my status interests.
Uh, BUT yes, despite the fact that this opinion
is self-interested, I do think it is correct. I
think, um, The best or perhaps the only way
to understand human nature, the human condition, is by
viewing it correctly, uh, as the product of natural
selection. Um, I think that is the source of
humanity, that is where we come from. Um, I
find it, uh, baffling that people think that when
trying to study the structure and function of an
evolved organ, it is OK to not think about
the process that made that organ. Um, I, I,
I continue to be baffled by it. I think
it is one of the great distortionary pressures in
science that evolutionary psychology is not common sense at
this point, that viewing the human animal in evolutionary
terms, whether cultural evolution or biological evolution, whatever, I,
I don't have a dog in that fight. Any
kind of evolution applied to the human animal is
going to deepen and enrich her understanding of the
human animal, and the fact that this perspective has
not caught on and become fully mainstream, uh, is
deeply saddening. Um, NEVERTHELESS, there is some hope, there
has been some progress made, uh, evolutionary perspectives have
gotten considerably more mainstream than they have been, uh,
in the past few decades. Uh, IT has gotten,
uh, more respectable, uh, more prestigious evolutionary psychology papers
are getting published in the top journals more and
more. Uh, PEOPLE are more frequently, uh, viewing it
as a legitimate and powerful perspective to take. There
is progress. It's slower than I would hope it
would be, but there there is progress being made.
So where can people find you on the internet?
Well, you can find me at Twitter at David
Pinsoff, uh, you can find my blog, Everything is
bullshit at Everything is bullshit.blog. Uh, YOU can feel
free to, uh, direct message me, uh, happy to
answer any questions and, and chat.
Great. So thank you so much for doing this
again. It's also very fun to talk with you.
Yeah, my pleasure, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asila dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zaledrianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sai Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.